COMPUTER:
The directions for a human
being are written in code
three billion letters long.
These instructions tell
our bodies how to live,
how to grow, how to die.
Researchers call this code
"The Sequence."
Captioning sponsored by THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Just ten years ago a genetic
cures for diseases like OCD seem
like a dream
of the very far off future.
That's because we didn't know
how to read the DNA--
the genetic code-- fast enough.
Without the big picture--
the entire genome
of any particular organism--
we couldn't analyze
what was wrong with its genes.
But now we can.
It was the challenge
to decode the human genome
that got scientists inspired
to come up with the technology
to do it,
and that technology
has transformed
the life sciences
and the laboratory.
( computer beeps )
COMPUTER:
The basic tools
of gene sequencing
are bacteria, robots
and computers.
After DNA is pulled out of cells
and broken up into random
fragments by enzymes,
it is inserted into bacteria.
The bacteria then do what
bacteria do best-- multiply.
But as the bacteria divide,
they're also making new copies
of the DNA fragments.
Then pipetting robots separate
the millions and millions of
DNA fragments from the bacteria.
PCR machines make
millions more copies
of the refined DNA fragments
and color-code
each A, G, C and T.
The gene sequencer lines up
all the fragments
and reads out the last letter
of each fragment
from the shortest
to the longest.
This spells out the sequence
of the fragment.
Once the sequence
of a chunk of DNA is known,
it goes into
a powerful computer,
which looks
for overlapping sequences
so it can reassemble
the whole genome.
MAN:
What's exciting
about the lab of the future
as opposed
to the lab of the past
is that we're increasingly able
to take global views
of what's going on
inside a cell.
We may think about the cell
as some tiny little entity,
but when you imagine
what's going on in that cell,
it's vast.
There are 30,000 genes
making perhaps 100,000, 200,000
different types of proteins
that interact with each other
in just myriad different ways.
SEVERSON:
Enough information exists to
fill 5,000 encyclopedia volumes,
or one million pages,
and it all has to be analyzed.
To study the genetic parts list
of the tiny factory
that is a human cell,
a whole new set of tools
had to be invented.
LANDER:
In order to turn this
into a process
in which we could generate
millions and tens of millions
of letters of DNA
every single day,
we had to rethink and automate
all of these approaches.
And so it involved a... a pretty
thoroughgoing reevaluation--
uh, lots of, you know,
technical details,
but the basic notion was we had
to reinvent the biochemistry
so that a robot could do it.
SEVERSON:
The robot turns out information
and data at a fantastic rate.
It can sequence 70 million
base pairs of DNA in a day--
a lifetime of work for many
biologists doing it the old way.
LANDER:
The whole mind frame
of a biologist has to change
to now look for answers
in a sea not of one picture
or one microscope slide but in
billions of bits of information,
and traditionally
in the 20th century,
biologists didn't think a lot
about billions of bits
of information.
SEVERSON:
These bits come in bytes
from all over the world.
Thanks to the Internet,
sharing information is easy.
Data, gene banks,
reports of discoveries
are all available
almost instantly.
Bioinformatics is critical
for managing the global flow
of information.
WOMAN:
As we're taking
this global view,
we're acquiring data
at a rate that was inconceivable
even just a few years ago.
Every year we double the amount
of data that we have to store.
When you have this kind
of scale of data,
then the analytic skills
that can be brought to bear
by a physicist, by a
mathematician, by an astronomer,
that becomes
very, very important.
SEVERSON:
John Rioux is
a research scientist.
His partner, Mark Daly,
is a computational analyst.
They are investigating
the genetic connection
with Crohn's disease,
an inflammatory disease
of the digestive tract.
MAN:
For Crohn's disease, uh,
had we gotten to a region
of the genome a few years ago,
we would had
to have spent many years
just to identify all
the sequence in that region,
identify the genes
within that region
and to identify all the
genetic variants of those genes.
Uh, essentially right now
we can go to the Web
and find all that we need
to know within a few minutes,
and what we've been focusing on
more recently
is how to understand
how the genetic variants, uh,
are in patterns and how we can
associate that with disease.
SEVERSON:
It takes very powerful computers
and innovative computer programs
to analyze and make sense of
billions of bits of information.
It also requires a different
approach to making discoveries.
LANDER:
The lab of the future is
not just the biologist's lab.
We need to bring together
all of the different disciplines
that can detect
and analyze processes and data.
Mathematicians,
computer scientists, engineers,
automation experts, chemists...
It's about a different community
of minds coming together.
Biology for the first time
is about information.
It's become
an information science
in a way that it wasn't
in the 20th century,
and that's just causing
a radical change
in the way biologists
approach problems.
SEVERSON:
Diseases like diabetes, cancer
and Alzheimer's
have so far defied science.
The lab of the future
is tackling them differently,
piecing together the circuit
of cellular life
and trying to understand what
happens when the circuit fails.
So, this has all
9,000 spots on it.
9,600.
SEVERSON:
This is a DNA microarray--
another tool in the lab
of the future.
Here it shows what all the genes
are doing in a cancer cell.
Cancer has a complex
genetic profile.
MAN:
Each of the spots
on this microarray represents
a different gene
in a patient's leukemia cell,
and by looking at the color--
the intensity
of each of these spots--
we can see how much activity
there is for each of these genes
in that patient's tumor.
As recently
as four or five years ago,
one person could measure perhaps
two or three of these genes, uh,
every two or three days,
and now we're able
to measure tens of thousands
of these spots simultaneously
day in and day out.
SEVERSON:
Technology
isn't doing everything.
Biologists are
still hard at work.
But now the two
are inextricably connected,
working in tandem
to gain a new perspective
about cellular activity
as a whole.
LANDER:
What we're really seeing now
is the ability
to complement that
component-by-component approach
with a global overview,
and it's... it's that duality
between looking
at the individual parts
and looking at them together
as a system
that I think will be
really powerful.
The biological laboratory
is changing at just
an incredibly rapid pace
so that the lab of the future
is always advancing.
Will the laboratory
of the future ever just be here
and will be done?
No, of course not, because
the future is always tomorrow,
and I think
for as far out as I can see,
there are more and more
better ideas
for probing the cell
more deeply,
and so the lab of the future
is a work in progress.
By now, most of us
are familiar
with the image
of the twisted ladder,
or double-helix structure
of DNA.
The year 2003 will mark
the 50-year anniversary
of the discovery
of this structure,
a discovery that changed the way
we perceive ourselves.
Not long after the discovery,
researchers began studying
the mysteries
of this blueprint for life
by focusing on one gene
at a time.
But today,
with advanced machines,
we are able to get a much bigger
picture of genetic expression.
MAN:
Years ago, we used to work
on one gene for ten years--
20 years sometimes--
and we'd do work
and over and over to do work
and try to get it isolated,
trying to clone it, do all
the, you know, what?
Produce protein from it.
And now to think that you can
take this technology
and look at 33,000 genes
overnight is just...
it's an amazing advancement
in the science.
SEVERSON:
What has enabled scientists
to make this leap
from studying one gene at a time
to thousands
is something called
microarray analysis.
The technique has become an
essential tool for scientists.
Microarrays allow us
to ask the question
of what gene activities occur
in a set of samples.
They could be a pair of samples,
they could be five samples,
100 samples,
but what are the gene activity
differences
that distinguish one set
of samples from another.
SEVERSON:
By studying gene activity,
or gene expression,
scientists can begin
to understand
the molecular process--
how genes express themselves.
COMPUTER VOICE:
About gene expression:
Within the nucleus of each cell
are long strings of DNA
made up of sequences
we call genes.
Each gene carries a unique set
of instructions,
directing the cell
to produce a specific protein--
the building blocks of life.
Each gene turns on and off
at different times
in the life of a cell.
This activity is called
gene expression.
By studying how and when
genes express--
when they turn on and off--
we can better understand
what makes each person unique,
what causes disease,
and how disease
may be genetically treated.
SEVERSON:
Microarray analysis
is common now
in laboratories
across the world.
Two methods are used
to create microarrays.
One uses sophisticated robots,
tissue samples from which
the DNA will be extracted
and old-fashioned glass slides.
( robot whirs tray into place )
THOMPSON:
Spotted arrays, in essence,
are microscope slides
onto which we use robotics
to spot a very small solution
of DNA.
The robot tracks exactly
the position of each DNA spot,
and that information
is critical.
SEVERSON:
The heart of microarray analysis
is DNA itself,
which is made up
of four base proteins.
A device called a writer
stacks these base proteins
in precise spots--
as many as 22,000 spots--
on the surface of a glass chip
and keeps track
of where they were put.
Then, depending on
how the genes are expressing,
they will bond
in specific patterns
with the DNA stacks on glass,
a bit like how a crossword
puzzle fits together.
The fluorescent tags are then
scanned or excited by a laser.
The red and green colors reveal
complex patterns indicating
genes at work-- or not.
The colors indicate,
you know,
sort of levels
of gene activity...
THOMPSON:
We then analyze or use these
microarrays in an experiment
where we'll have
two different biological samples
where... in which we want
to ask the question
"Well, what are
the gene-activity differences
between them?"
And at the end of that,
we basically end up getting
very long, Excel-like
spreadsheets of information
that relate DNA identity
in one column
with sort of gene activity
in another column.
SEVERSON:
The other type of microarray
analysis uses something
called gene chips.
These small chips, about the
size of your fingernail, contain
tiny synthetic fragments of DNA.
Each chip enables us
to analyze 18,000 genes
in the human genome,
a far cry from
our limited abilities
to look at one gene at a time
only a few years ago.
Following a similar method
of color coding and analysis,
scientists are able
to get a visual road map
of what genetic signals
are turned on or off
in a specific sample,
and to what degree.
JOHNSON:
What you're seeing is
the image from the chip.
So, after we put
the sample in the chip
and went through the process
of... of scanning it
what you'll get is
a bunch of little squares.
And each of these little squares
is what they call a feature.
And the feature is
what is telling you
the level of expression, or how
high the gene is in your sample.
And, for example, you can see,
the intense white means
there's a lot of that transcript
in the sample.
Whereas if it's dark blue,
that means there is
basically nothing there;
so that chip is not able
to detect any of that message.
SEVERSON:
In both methods
of microarray analysis,
by comparing one set of genes
against a control sample,
scientists are able to see what
specific genes are different.
JOHNSON:
So what it allows us to do is
it allows us to eliminate
all of the genes
that are unaffected,
but just look at the genes
that are either increased
or decreased
relative to the control.
So hopefully
out of the 33,000 genes,
we will get down to a very
small, like 10 percent or less,
of genes that are
actually different
between the two samples.
And then we can really...
focus in on those genes
and try to identify
their function.
THOMPSON:
Once we have a handle on
the 30, the 50, the 112 genes
that might really describe
a particular disease condition,
we don't necessarily need
to continue to monitor
all 30,000 or 50,000 genes--
however many there are
in the genome--
and we can be more specific.
So you can imagine this tool
being used clinically
to assess, you know,
whether a person is responding
to a particular therapy
or even actually has
a particular disease.
This technology is allowing
scientists to ask questions
they've never been able
to ask before,
by giving them access
to the genetic specs
of the blueprint of life.
By all accounts
Francis Collins
is one of the giants
of genomic research.
He's director
of the U.S. government's
National Human Genome
Research Institute.
On June 26, 2000, President
Clinton honored Collins,
along with genetics entrepreneur
Craig Venter,
for mapping the first draft
of the human genome.
It was an accomplishment
that may prove more significant
than smashing the atom
or landing the first man
on the moon.
Our talking encyclopedia,
I'm sure,
is just dying to tell you
all about him.
COMPUTER:
Francis Collins,
born Francis Sellers Collins,
April 14, 1950
in Staunton, Virginia.
Raised on a farm.
Home-schooled
until the sixth grade.
Bachelor of Science,
University of Virginia, 1970.
Ph.D., Yale University, 1974.
Doctor of Internal Medicine,
University
of North Carolina, 1977.
Part of a team
that discovered the gene
for cystic fibrosis, 1989.
Became director
of the U.S. Humane Genome
Research Institute, 1993.
Committed Christian.
Likes to play guitar.
( playing guitar )
SEVERSON:
When he's not playing guitar
at holiday parties,
Francis Collins is a busy man.
The sequencing of the genome
was just the start of
the process of discovery.
He believes the genome map
has launched
a new era in science--
the genomic age.
COLLINS:
Well, I think what's happened
is so historical,
that it deserves to be denoted
by some significant description,
and maybe "the genomic age"
is a reasonable one.
We have been trying
to understand ourselves
without the information
contained in
our own instruction book.
But now we have it,
and we'll never go back again
to that position of ignorance
that we have been in
for millennia.
And the challenge for us
is to figure out how to read it
and then apply it
to benefit humankind.
SEVERSON:
Collins believes that by 2020,
there will be gene-based
designer drugs for diabetes,
hypertension, heart disease
and schizophrenia.
Cancer treatment
will be transformed,
and every patient
will be prescribed medicines
that are tailored
to his own genetic fingerprint.
Big expectations,
but Collins says genetics
is taking a lot of
the trial-and-error guesswork
out of making medicine.
COLLINS:
Genetics is so compelling
because it does allow you to go
right to the most
basic molecular level
of what is wrong
in this disease
and lay that out
in very clear terms,
and that, in turn, gives you
ideas about therapy
that you never would have
arrived at empirically.
Comparing
this to that...
COLLINS:
So we are trying to come up
with a technology
that will allow you to associate
any variant letter with
a disease like diabetes.
SEVERSON:
Adult-onset diabetes
is Collins' latest target,
and he is passionate about
finding a genetic cure,
but that'll be a very tough job.
COLLINS:
This is orders of magnitude
more difficult
than anything
we've ever tried to do.
And it would have been called
completely silly
to even undertake this
a few years ago.
But now with the tools
of the genome project,
it becomes at least imaginable
that we might be able
to succeed at this.
And if we could find the genes
that contribute
to adult-onset diabetes,
each one of those would be
a wonderful opportunity
to shine a bright light
into this mystery
of why this disease comes about,
which is really
a very big mystery.
And that would lead us
to new therapies
that might be
much more effective
than what we currently have.
SEVERSON:
Collins is also one
of the self-anointed "watchdogs"
of genetics because,
for all its potential for good,
there is equal cause
for concern.
Genetic testing, for instance,
raises fears
about genetic privacy.
COLLINS:
I've ended up spending
a very large fraction of my time
on these ethical, legal
and social issues,
because if we don't
get these right,
all of these wonderful medical
advances won't get us very far
because people will be afraid
to take advantage of them
and that would be
a terrible tragedy.
They're afraid the information
might get used against them,
and we can't honestly tell them
that that's an unwarranted fear.
I would like to be able to say
it's an unwarranted fear.
It will take more action on the
policy side to make that happen.
SEVERSON:
And if people do decide to find
out about their genetic traits,
will they try to create
designer babies?
COLLINS:
Well, I think a lot of people
are wondering
what's going to happen
down the road.
It's great to use genetics
to cure terrible disease.
I haven't met too many people
who are opposed to that.
But when you get
outside of disease
into things that
are really more traits,
where are the boundaries here
and how far do we want to go
in that direction?
SEVERSON:
Not only is genetics
the most controversial
of the life sciences,
it is also the most expensive.
Collins asks the U.S. Congress
for tens of millions of dollars
every year,
just to keep the Human Genome
Project in operation.
At the same time,
the genomics industry
has made a lot of millionaires.
Many of his colleagues,
like Craig Venter,
left their government jobs
for the wealth and freedom
of the private sector,
but not Collins.
COLLINS:
Well, being a federal
scientist-physician
is certainly not
the way to get rich.
But on my scale of what
really matters in life,
what I hope to do
is to participate
in something meaningful,
to do something
for other people,
and this gives me
an opportunity,
like nothing I ever could have
imagined, to do just that.
SEVERSON:
Francis Collins takes
his mission seriously,
but he can also poke fun
at himself.
( crowd cheering
and applauding )
Here he's addressing
a graduating class
at the University of Virginia.
( to the tune of "My Way" ):
* Don't talk to me
* Go see the dean
* Just start today
* Love DNA
* And do it my way.
( one person applauding )
Of course, the sequencing
of the human genome
produced as many questions
as answers.
There's still a lot of work
to be done.
Let's hear about that from
another superstar geneticist,
Eric Lander
of the Whitehead Institute
at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
When you run a computer program
across the human DNA
to look for genes,
what you're really looking for
is the portions of DNA
that code for proteins according
to the classical genetic code.
We know how to do that
reasonably well by computer.
We are almost
completely clueless
at running a computer program
across the DNA
to look for
the regulation signals
that say, "Turn on the gene
in this tissue," like the heart,
or "at this time,"
when you reach puberty.
That's the real challenge.
We'd really like
to be able to read
the regulatory code
of the genome,
and increasingly, I think we're
going to be able to do that.
But the trick is not by
just looking at the human.
It's by comparing the sequence
of the human to other organisms,
like, for example, the mouse,
a relative of ours
of a hundred million years ago.
Well, it turns out that nature
has lovingly conserved
the structural information
for the genes
and the regulatory
information.
And if we line up
the human sequences
and the mouse sequences,
we can see things stand out
clearly as having been preserved
that must be regulatory
information.
We don't quite know how
to interpret all of it yet,
but just in the past year,
we've stumbled upon hundreds
of millions of bases
of important conserved
regulatory information.
And if we can understand how
that turns genes on and off,
we'll learn an awful lot
about the circuitry of life.
Recently a woman
beat the odds
in life's most
celebrated lottery:
She gave birth
to four identical girls--
a phenomenon that only happens
every one in 11 million births.
The birth of identical twins
is more common,
one in every 250 births.
But the story made us wonder
about how genetics
might be linked
to the phenomena of identical
and fraternal twins.
COMPUTER:
About twins:
To begin with, "identical"
and "fraternal" are inaccurate
and misleading terms
when it comes to twins.
What we call "identical,"
scientists
call "monozygotic" twins,
meaning the result of an egg
that has split
following fertilization.
Such twins may or may not
look alike.
What they are
is genetically identical.
In the case of so-called
"fraternal" twins,
scientists use
the term "dizygotic"
to describe the result
when two sperm fertilize
two different eggs.
Essentially dizygotic twins
are just siblings
born at the same time.
They share, on average,
50% of their genes.
SEVERSON:
Meet Joe and Jason Zamoiski,
twin brothers
born four minutes apart.
28 years later, thanks
to progress in DNA testing,
Joe and Jason can learn
exactly what kind of twins
they are: fraternal--
I mean, dizygotic--
or monozygotic, identical.
They don't look much alike
today, but once they did.
TWIN:
When I look at baby pictures
and I look at pictures
when we were younger,
I can't even
tell us apart.
I have to ask my mom,
you know, who's who
up until
we were probably
about three
or four years old
in certain pictures.
She used to paint
one of our toenails--
I don't know who it was--
just so she could tell
the difference between us.
She used to paint
our right pinkie toe,
and I think that was
your pinkie toe,
by the way.
Okay, well...
SEVERSON:
Since birth, Joe and Jason
have believed
they came from the same egg.
Their lifestyles
are certainly similar.
They both chose the same
profession, mortgage banking,
and they share
an intense emotional bond.
TWIN:
If I can look at him
and I know pretty much--
or if we're sitting
at a dinner table
having a conversation,
I know what he's thinking,
and he knows what
I'm thinking as well.
TWIN:
Right, we...
it's kind of...
it's kind of
like an unwritten,
like, psychic bond
that we have, no doubt.
Right, we can just
kind of just figure
each other out
without having
to say anything.
That's kind of cool.
Yeah.
You know?
SEVERSON:
But it's their differences
that make them wonder
about their true "twinship."
Physically, they're opposites:
Joe's a lefty,
Jason's right-handed.
We'll be in a car,
for example,
or my friend
will be driving,
and he'll look
in the rear-view mirror
and... and freak out
for a second
and think that
it was Jason
that he's looking at
in the mirror,
when in actuality
it's me, and vice versa.
SEVERSON:
The Zamoiski brothers are what
scientists call "mirror twins"--
when one twin's
physical features
are the opposite of the other.
The features on Joe's left side
resemble Jason's right side,
and when they look
in the mirror,
it reverses the asymmetries.
Well, you be the judge.
TWIN:
You know, other differences
are obviously,
physically-wise, you know,
he's an inch taller than I am.
He weighs about
15 pounds or so
more than I do.
Twenty.
20 pounds
more than I do.
Um, that has
a lot to do with,
you know, the fact
that I have Crohn's
and Joe doesn't
have Crohn's.
Get on it...
Get on it!
SEVERSON:
It was 11 years ago
when Jason was diagnosed
with Crohn's disease.
Crohn's disease is
a gastrointestinal disorder
causing inflammation
of the large intestine.
Joe hasn't shown any signs
of Crohn's yet,
but if he and Jason
are from the same egg,
he's got a good chance
of getting it--
Crohn's has a strong
genetic component.
Recently scientists
identified a genetic mutation
known as Nod-2 on chromosome 16
that has been associated
with the disease
in 15% to 20%
of Crohn's patients.
It is responsible
for encoding a protein
that helps
the immune system respond
to some types of bacteria.
Give it
a good roll, Sally!
MACHIN:
Crohn's disease has been known
for several years to...
to cluster in families,
and there's an increased
frequency of Crohn's disease
in brothers and sisters.
And it looks as though
the likelihood
of a co-twin developing
Crohn's disease at some stage
when the monozygotic twin
partner has Crohn's disease
is something between
25% and 50%,
whereas for dizygotic twinning,
it's a lot less than that.
It's in the range
of less than ten percent.
SEVERSON:
That knowledge alone was enough
to convince Joe and Jason
to send away for a DNA test.
"Using one swab,
"rub the entire area
of the left cheek
inside your mouth."
SEVERSON:
The test is remarkably simple--
a cotton swab rubbed
on the inside of the mouth
will provide enough DNA to
determine whether Joe and Jason
are monozygotic
or dizygotic twins.
Seal the bad boy up.
SEVERSON:
At the lab, scientists analyze
the samples with a PCR test.
"PCR" stands for
polymerase chain reaction--
a process of isolating
and duplicating
a particular stretch of DNA.
Dr. Dan Demers is director of
Fairfax Identity Laboratories.
DEMERS:
In this particular case,
we're going to have to look at
multiple locations in the genome
in order to determine whether
the DNA from the two individuals
has an identical pattern or not.
SEVERSON:
Computers analyze 13 positions
at different chromosomes
from each twin
and then search for any
four-letter repetitions.
Let's say a repeated sequence
from Jason spells out "A-T-T-C."
The computer then compares it
with the same sequence
from Joe's DNA.
If Joe's sequence has
the same letter combination,
it would prove that he and Jason
have identical genes
at that particular point.
But that's only one point out of
three billion sequenced letters
in the 30,000 to 40,000 genes
that make up the human genome.
So the computer
repeats the process
at 13 different points
on the genome,
which gives them enough
statistical evidence
to determine
the twins' zygosity.
Think of it like bar codes
on groceries we buy
at the supermarket.
The lab is identifying
Joe and Jason's bar codes
to see if they're the same.
All's we have to do
is find one difference
in their genetic profile,
and we know they cannot be
identical twins;
they must be fraternal twins.
On the other hand,
in the case of identical twins,
we can never know
with 100% certainty.
SEVERSON:
The only way to be
absolutely certain
is to sequence the entire genome
of both twins.
DEMERS:
But for all
intents and purposes,
when you're 99.999%
probability of certainty,
then that, I think, offers
quite a bit of certainty
that they are,
in fact, identical
and not fraternal twins.
Our DNA test came in.
All right.
Let's take a look
at it.
SEVERSON:
Just ten days after mailing in
their DNA samples,
Joe and Jason get the results.
"Summary findings:
"13 independent genetic
loci were tested.
"The DNA profiles obtained
"from Mr. Joe Zamoiski
and Jason Zamoiski
"are identical
at every locus.
Based on this..."
SEVERSON:
The waiting is over.
The secrets of at least
part of their sequence
have been revealed.
So we're
identical twins!
All right.
God, I looked at
my e-mail today...
SEVERSON:
Now Joe and his family
know his chances of getting
Crohn's disease are higher
and they can better
prepare for it.
MACHIN:
Just because one of the twins
does not have Crohn's disease,
does not mean that
he might not develop it
at some stage in the future.
But what a great thing
to try to look for it,
suggest sensible things
he might to do prevent it,
and, should he get it, to be
able to offer treatment early
and to try and stop him getting
many of the major complications.
I'll see you later,
all right?
SEVERSON:
Genetic science has told
Joe and Jason Zamoiski
a lot about each other.
It also tells us that
when it comes to twins,
appearances can indeed deceive,
and in more ways than one.
COMPUTER:
Remember the movie Twins,
where Danny DeVito
and Arnold Schwarzenegger
played identical twins?
Hollywood producers
actually did their research.
There's a phenomenon called
"unequal identical twins"
caused by unequal cell division
or prenatal conditions.
One baby may take
all the nutrients
and crowd out the other baby
in the womb.
This results in one baby
developing bigger, stronger
and healthier than the other.
There have even been cases of
opposite-sex monozygotic twins.
Monozygotic twins--
identical twins--
who are the opposite sex?
As improbable as it seems,
genetic testing proved it
to be true
in the case of 12-year-old
Ricky and Erica Naccarato.
In the earliest stages
of development,
when the embryo split,
Ricky got mostly XY chromosomes
but Erica only got cells
with one X,
and girls with a missing X
have a disease
called Turner's Syndrome.
Erica is lucky to have reached
this age.
She's had to undergo
heart surgery
and have her ovaries removed.
The future for her, I'm afraid,
is very uncertain.
Identical twins
who are not identical
may be the biggest surprise,
but genetic studies are
revealing other new details
including what causes
twin births
to occur in the first place.
It is widely believed
and understood that dizy...
that DZ twins--dizygotic twins--
run in families,
and that does seem
to be the case.
And most people, if you read
the books about twins, will say,
"Well, therefore, MZ twins
don't run in families."
And there are very few...
I think there were three papers
saying, "Yes, they do
run in families."
SEVERSON:
They clearly can run
in families,
and inside this house
are multiple cases in point.
WOMAN:
Is that for
your dollhouse?
SEVERSON:
Welcome to the Weinsteins.
Here you'll find twin after twin
after twin after twin.
WOMAN:
Boop!
SEVERSON:
And that's just the babies.
They all come from the same
grandmother, who is also a twin.
Ah, here are
your sister's...
SEVERSON:
Meet Phyllis..
Alice...
Alexandra...
Nicole...
Courtney...
and Camryn.
All twins in the same family.
Phyllis, on the right,
just became a grandma
four times over
within five months.
What do you think?
I'm the queen grandma.
SEVERSON:
For the Weinsteins, fun is
playing the guessing game.
Pardon?
Okay, I have Nicky,
I have Alex,
um... Courtney and Camryn.
I think I got it right.
I think you did.
WOMAN:
And you are wrong.
I am?
Courtney and Camryn.
( chuckles )
I think...
I think... this one
has more hair.
Now, what one...?
Camryn?
Courtney.
WOMAN:
I knew it.
I have...
Oh, dear.
I have Camryn.
MAN:
Oh, Phyllis, I just
said I was holding...
Kate had Camryn.
I have Courtney.
I thought I knew it!
SEVERSON:
With four twin girls
in the family,
who can blame her
for getting it wrong?
After all, she's still in shock.
PHYLLIS:
Yes, I said
I'm absolutely thrilled.
I never thought
it would happen,
because I'm
an identical twin,
and I was always told
it wouldn't run in
our family at all,
and it was just by chance,
and it happened.
SEVERSON:
How could this happen?
What are the chances?
These are the questions
that sparked the curiosity
of grandfather
Richard Weinstein.
The coincidence of finding three
sets of twins in one family,
I thought, was
rather fascinating;
and that sort of got me started.
He e-mailed me originally
and said he'd got my name,
and he had figured out
that the chances
of having three sets
of twins in the family
was one in, you know, X million,
and what did I think.
And I wrote back and said,
"Well, sounds like familial
MZ twinning to me--"
a well-known phenomenon to me.
So then there was a silence.
And he wrote back and said,
"Huh! What's that?" you know.
SEVERSON:
Dr. Machin has been
studying twins
for most of his 30-year career.
He is convinced that twins
do run in families.
And after talking to him,
the grandfather was inspired
to write his own hypothesis.
Within a few months,
he produced an 80-page thesis
called "One In Two-Million",
chock-full of diagrams,
photographs
and a detailed family pedigree
going back many generations.
There's a total
of nine sets of twins,
of which eight of them
are same-sex twins.
Your... your likelihood of
having eight same-sex twins...
just having that number of twins
says something's going on.
I mean, there is no doubt
that something is going on.
There is some sort of trait
in this family constellation
that causes this to happen.
SEVERSON:
But what trait could that be?
Dr. Machin has his own ideas.
MACHIN:
I think it's probably a mutation
in a gene that codes
for proteins
that are present on the surface
of cells
that keeps cells together,
make them adhere
to each other.
But if you have a mutation
that... that doesn't keep that
glue so sticky as it should be,
the cells will tend
to drift apart.
And so that original
little ball of cells
in the first few days
after ovulation
might tend more easily
to drift apart
into two clones, if you like,
which would make twins.
SEVERSON:
Dr. Machin wants to go
on a gene search,
but he needs more evidence.
First, he thinks the reason
we don't know
if monozygotic twins
run in families
is because most families
don't know if they have them.
After all, just because
they don't look identical
doesn't mean they aren't
from a single egg.
Machin strongly advocates
DNA testing
to determine if twins are
dizygotic or monozygotic,
and has been running his own
testing clinic for years.
We've tested more than 500 pairs
from all over North America,
and you might be interested
in the results.
Of those 500, 20 were DZ,
and 480 were MZ.
SEVERSON:
In other words, 96% were
identical or monozygotic.
As more families find out
they have monozygotic twins
rather than dizygotic,
Machin's database
will keep growing.
And that's the key for starting
a gene search.
He's already collected
statistics
from 50 families
like the Weinsteins.
RICHARD:
To the best people on Earth--
us.
( all exclaim )
ALL:
Cheers.
Doctors still often
misdiagnose twins
as monozygotic or dizygotic.
They used to think the placenta
was a fail-safe indicator
of the type of twin,
but that's not always the case.
COMPUTER:
That is correct.
Dizygotic twins also
have two placentae,
but monozygotic twins
can also have two placentae
or shared, fused placentae.
Shared, fused placentae
make up one-third,
or 33%, of monozygotic twins.
The other two-thirds, or 66%,
of monozygotic twins
are born with one placenta.
The last word
on the causes of twins
has yet to be written,
of course.
We're only beginning
to understand
the role genes play in this
and many other aspects
of conception
and early development.
But in the case of monozygotes
and dizygotes...
* And little lambs eat ivy...
we can finally tell
which is which.
Mutant
The word conjures the strange,
the monstrous,
something gone terribly wrong
biologically,
and the result is, well, scary.
Hollywood horror films are
full of mutant beings
doing their mutant thing.
MAN:
Incredibly huge!
WOMAN:
Honey, what's happened?
I'm so big!
SEVERSON:
Whether it's a giant woman
or a human turned into a fly,
movie mutants are generally
acknowledged to be mistakes
or freaks of nature.
Giants! Giants!
SEVERSON:
These movies were made
about the same time the
double helix was discovered.
Today, we might try and blame
her Amazonian dimensions
on catastrophic mutations
in her developmental genes.
Truth is, mutants and mutations
aren't just the stuff
of old "B" movies.
Mutations and mutant genes
are a part of real life, too.
When do these mutations occur?
It varies wildly: some genes
change in less than a day,
some over a lifetime,
some over centuries.
It's evolution, and
it isn't just something
that happened a long time ago.
It's going on right now.
MAN:
For example, if there is a gene
that protects against
an infectious disease,
and then a wave
of that infection--
a plague, if you will--
hits a population,
you can see that
the copies of the gene
that protect against
that infection
will be more common
in the offspring,
because the offspring
that survived
had to be resistant
to that disease.
SEVERSON:
In this way, changes or
mutations in the human genome
have gradually collected
and been added over time.
Some are good, and
some are a mixed bag.
ALTSHULER:
The same DNA change
that causes this terrible
disease-- sickle cell anemia--
that causes so much suffering,
has also been shown to protect
against infection with malaria.
So in fact, the reason
in some populations
that there is a high frequency
of the sickle cell anemia
mutation--
you might call it-- is because
the offspring who inherit it
are more protected
against malaria.
Is that a shield protecting us
against malaria
or a defect in our genome?
Well, I guess in some ways
it's a tradeoff; it's both.
SEVERSON:
The human genome is
rigged for survival
and thus, over time,
incorporates changes that help.
But not all changes in
our genetic code defend us--
some are killers.
Medical researchers worldwide
want to find
the mutant disease genes
in all of us
and use them
to create therapies,
and clues are the misspellings
in the genome.
MAN:
If you're a geneticist
who is hunting for the genes
which underlie diseases,
then what you are looking for
are places where
the genomes differ
between individuals
that have those diseases
and individuals that don't.
And so from that standpoint,
it's this fraction of the genome
that differs between individuals
that's actually
more interesting.
SEVERSON:
Daly is a computational
biologist
at the Whitehead Institute
in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
He uses statistical analysis
on human DNA
to find genetic signposts
pointing to disease.
There are nearly ten million
alternate spellings
among the genes
of the human genome:
some are good, others seem
to have little or no impact.
Still other misspellings
are like smoking guns,
pointing to disease.
What I'm showing here you
is the result
of sequencing a short region
of chromosome five.
We find a "G" at this
certain position here,
and the other two-thirds
of the time,
we'd find a "C"
at this position here.
But what it turns out to be...
the case is that individuals
carrying the "G" at this spot
are maybe two to three times
more likely
to develop Crohn's disease
over the course of their life
than individuals who are just
carrying "C" at that location.
SEVERSON:
In the movies, mutants
are tall stories, unreal.
But inside us, gene mutations
can create monsters
that are all too real.
Todd Golub researches
genetic mutations
that create malignant monsters.
The monster isn't 50 feet tall,
it's the size of a single
microscopic cell
that has gone berserk.
In the early days of thinking
about the genetics of cancer,
it was
a one-mutation-one-cancer model
where people thought that it
would only take one mutation
to cause a tumor.
It's now quite clear
that's not the case,
that it's more likely that it
would require several mutations,
the exact number
still not being clear.
We know that when we look at the
genetic pattern of cancer cells
and compare them to the genetic
patterns of normal cells
there are a huge
number of differences
at the genetic level,
maybe thousands of genes.
Only a small number of those--
perhaps a couple--
are actually choke points for
the development of that cancer.
SEVERSON:
Worldwide, researchers
are looking for mutant genes
at places like the Sanger Center
in England, just south
of the other Cambridge.
They want to know all
the misspellings and mutations
that promote cancer
and why they occur.
Exposure to chemical carcinogens
will cause mutations.
Exposure to damaging UV
radiation will cause mutations.
Defects
in just general DNA repair...
I mean, to be able to replicate
the entire
three billion base pairs of DNA
accurately every time
is a huge task
and sometimes mistakes are made
and that's the genesis
of what causes cancer.
Cells normally
behave quite nicely.
They grow when they should
and they don't grow
when they shouldn't
and they grow where they should
and not where they shouldn't.
Cancer breaks all those rules:
Cancer cells grow
inappropriately.
They move throughout the body
and grow where they shouldn't.
And understanding what
at the genetic level
is driving those processes,
why cancer cells evade
the immune system,
why they can grow in the liver,
why they can grow in the brain
when they shouldn't be there--
I mean, understanding
the basis of that,
again, sort of builds
this knowledge base,
and, sort of, this notion
of knowledge being power...
the more knowledge
we have about cancer
the more power we have
to control it.
SEVERSON:
When the human genome
was sequenced,
it was, in effect,
a genetic snapshot,
a freeze-frame captured
at a point in human evolution.
The question is: What will
the human genome look like
ten thousand years from now?
If history is any indicator,
it will depend entirely
on what kind of a world
we will be living in.
ALTSHULER:
I think the human genome
is a changing, fluid,
dynamic entity
spread across 12 billion copies,
carried all over the world
by different people.
It carries variability
that was handed down
through the generations
from shared ancestors
who lived in Africa.
New mutations occur,
new changes occur
every generation
when the DNA is copied
and potentially
in every cell of our body.
And how those DNA changes--
the ones we inherited in common
and the new ones that occur
in our bodies--
interact with the environment
in which we live
and its changing characteristics
is a wonderful dance.
Some people like their kicks to
be fast and frequent.
They are the thrill seekers
who are easily bored.
Whether they get their jollies
from drugs, sex
or extreme sports,
the basic need
is the same: excitement.
But is this personality trait
something we learn,
or are its roots somewhere
deeper, in our genes?
One or a zero,
they both have the same thing.
One factorial is one,
zero factorial is zero, so...
SEVERSON:
Meet Doug Oberle.
By the way, if at anytime
you can't see the overhead...
SEVERSON:
Born in Washington, DC,
Doug is a 32-year-old
high school math teacher
in Alexandria, Virginia.
OBERLE:
...in on our own logic,
getting to a terminating case
and spiraling out.
SEVERSON:
As careers go,
this is pretty safe.
Today's lesson...
What I'd like to do today
is spiral logic.
Spiral logic
is referred to as recursion.
SEVERSON:
Outside the classroom,
Oberle's favorite pastime
gives new meaning
to the term "spiral logic."
After a 40-hour work week
teaching teenagers
the finer points of math,
he says good-bye
to the grounded world
and spends most of his weekends
leaping out of airplanes
with his buddies.
OBERLE:
I actually get more response
of shock from people learning
that I am a math teacher,
as opposed to a sky diver.
I'm the black sheep
in the family,
referred to as
the freak of the family.
SEVERSON:
Doug favors free flying,
a form of skydiving where
the jumpers reach speeds
in excess of 200 miles an hour
as they head toward earth.
And he's jumped
nearly 1,400 times.
He is what you might call a
"risk taker," a thrill seeker.
OBERLE:
I feel like I belong
in free fall.
The sensation of free fall,
being cushioned by air,
just the sensation of not having
anything under you,
just felt like a place
where I belonged.
I get something I refer
to as "ground sickness."
I get agitated,
I can't concentrate as well.
If I miss that on
a particular weekend
I don't feel right,
I feel off balance.
SEVERSON:
What makes Doug
so exhilarated by--
even addicted to-- skydiving?
The typical person
is terrified by the idea
of jumping out of planes,
or similar high-risk hobbies.
There just might be
a genetic explanation
for folks like Doug,
at least that's what
this man is looking for.
Risk takers happen to have...
RESEARCHER:
When they do this kind
of risk-taking behavior
they feel normal,
they feel, like, alive.
They feel like you and I,
but when they're not doing that,
they're down,
you know, life has no pleasure,
has no meaning,
you know,
"I'm not enjoying myself."
Dr. Noble reasons that thrill
seekers need their thrills
because their brains
work differently.
He has been researching
how certain genetic mutations
are related to the brain's use
of a chemical called dopamine.
COMPUTER:
About Dopamine:
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter
a chemical messenger
nerve cells use
to communicate with each other.
When humans are satisfied
after an especially
enjoyable experience,
the brain is awash in dopamine
and thus they feel good.
Noble's research indicates
that those born
with a genetic mutation
of the DRD2 or DRD4 gene
on chromosome 11
have fewer dopamine receptors.
As a population, these
individuals typically need
to experience more excitement
to achieve
the same sensations of pleasure.
SEVERSON:
According to Dr. Noble,
as many as 30% of humans
are born with a shortage
of dopamine receptors.
Are these people
more likely to become
risk takers like Doug Oberle?
Could that explain other kinds
of risky business
like gambling, drinking
too much, or using drugs?
NOBLE:
Almost all of us
take some risks.
When you get in the car
and drive on the highway
in a way,
you're taking a risk, right?
But there are those who,
when they get to the highway,
are always driving very fast,
taking great risks,
cutting corners, et cetera.
SEVERSON:
Which leads to another question:
If risk takers are more likely
to do dangerous things,
why do those genes show up so
often in the population today?
Why haven't
the risk takers died out?
NOBLE:
I think we take risks
because in doing so
we get excitement
or a thrill or a challenge.
The other reason
why we may take risks
is because in taking those risks
we accomplish great tasks,
do great things
like, uh, poetry,
like novels,
like music, et cetera.
( playing Mozart sonata )
SEVERSON:
Dr. Noble wants us to think
of our genetic inheritance
as just a part
of what makes us what we are.
( sonata continuing )
NOBLE:
When somebody sits down
and plays at the piano,
the strings of the piano
are like your DNA.
You can make the tone louder,
you can make it softer,
smoother, et cetera.
And you need the two to give you
the balance of life.
And that's what results
in your personality.
SEVERSON:
In his metaphor, the strings
of the piano are our genes.
The impact of our environment
is represented by the pedals
controlling how the notes sound,
but the third factor is
the pianist's personal style.
NOBLE:
The emotion that person puts in,
that finally results
in you sitting as an audience
and listening to this person,
see how beautifully
that person plays.
SEVERSON:
It's this concert
of genes and environment
that separates those
who are elated by Mozart
and those who go to greater
lengths, or heights,
to collect their thrills.
OBERLE:
The sky diver in me
does not want to consider
skydiving as risk taking.
But I think that in taking risks
you feel more alive.
That if just going
through life conservatively,
and, you know,
you don't experience
a wide range of emotions,
that there's, uh...
you know,
it's stagnant, it's static.
Whereas opposed to risk-taking
in a general sense
you know, it creates a more
fulfilling, dynamic experience.
It's obvious that
some people
are just naturally better
at sports than others.
They can run faster or farther
or develop bigger muscles.
Why?
Well, that and a lot else is
determined by our metabolism--
things like breathing,
heart rate, blood flow.
And our metabolism
is determined by our genes,
including two variants of
a very important gene named ACE.
I'm sure the computer
would love to tell us about it.
COMPUTER:
Well, Lucky, ACE stands for
angiotensin-converting enzyme,
a key element
of the circulation system
that dictates blood pressure.
Human beings have two ACE genes,
one inherited from each parent.
Each of these has variants
labeled I or D.
There are three
possible combinations.
The I variant makes less ACE,
the D variant makes more.
DDs tend to have higher
blood pressure, IIs lower.
For most people, high
blood pressure is undesirable.
It is associated with
heart disease and stroke.
So, is there
an evolutionary reason
that some produce higher levels
of ACE than others?
COMPUTER:
Good question.
There may have been
an adaptive advantage
to having high levels of ACE.
If you were unfortunate enough
to have had a leg bitten off
by a saber-toothed tiger
or experienced hemorrhage
in childbirth,
the increased blood pressure
of high-ACE-level individuals
would help them survive.
SEVERSON:
The relationship
between ACE and blood pressure
has been known for some time.
A family of drugs
called ACE inhibitors
have proved successful in
controlling high blood pressure
by lowering the levels
of ACE in the body.
To a doctor
at London's University College,
those results suggest that
something else is going on, too.
MAN:
The death rates were at least
halved by the ACE inhibitors,
so they were doing
something else magical,
and no one at that stage
knew what that was.
SEVERSON:
Hugh Montgomery's lab is devoted
to exploring the genes that
affect the heart and its growth.
MONTGOMERY:
Heart growth itself
in disease states
is almost universally
a bad thing.
And the bigger the heart gets,
the more likely you are to die.
Part of that is explicable
by the fact
that you've just got
an awful lot more heart muscle
and it gets a lot of
collagen, or scarring,
between the muscle cells
and it seems just to function
less well over time.
What we can see here is
a cardiac MRI of a normal heart.
SEVERSON:
The right ventricle pumps
blood to the lungs,
but the left ventricle,
shown here as this dark ring,
has to do all the work
of supplying blood
to the rest of the body.
The left ventricle here
is of normal thickness.
The MRI of
a thickened heart shows
just how much more
work it has to do
to keep the circulation going.
You can see, although the heart
looks relatively smaller here,
this wall of the left ventricle
is definitely thicker
and is making the cavity,
which is full of fluid,
actually look smaller.
if you have a thicker heart
muscle, more heart growth,
you are much more likely to have
a heart attack,
or to get peripheral
vascular disease,
or kidney failure or
to have a stroke.
And we don't know what's
connecting those two things.
If we can find out what
makes hearts grow,
then we can find out
perhaps what's also
causing strokes and
heart attacks.
Animal studies suggested
that the ace gene
had something to do with
heart growth.
But when it came time to do
human studies,
the options
were limited.
The only way in which one could
do that was to use the ace gene
as a measure of differences of
ace activity in heart muscle
because you can't otherwise
measure in a human.
You can't go around taking
pieces of heart muscle out.
But there was another way to
approach it.
The heart is a muscle and
muscles grow with exercise.
What if we could measure
the effects of exercise on
heart size and
match that against
their ace gene
expression.
Then we'd know whether ace
affects heart growth.
Enter the British Army.
New army recruits were
the perfect control
sample for this
experiment.
They're all roughly
the same age
and during their
basic training they live a
highly regulated,
identical lifestyle.
Over twelve weeks the recruits
were put through paces
with a combination of strength
and endurance training.
Samples of DNA were
taken from the recruits
and sent to the
lab at London.
In the meantime the
young soldiers
continued their
training.
Their heart and skeletal muscle
mass was measured periodically.
At first the results simply
seamed to confirm
what the researchers were
expecting to find.
Well the first thing
that we identified
was that we found that the two
D versions of the ace gene,
high ace activity was
associated with much greater
heart growth with
exercise.
The two I versions of the ace
gene, low ace activity
associated with much
less heart growth.
So the study demonstrated
that levels of ace
did indeed control
heart growth.
The recruits with higher levels
of ace built up bigger muscles
including their
heart muscles.
But the surprising finding was
that those with low ace levels
developed much
better stamina.
At the end of training we found
very dramatic effects.
The iis, the low ace
activity people
had doubled their
duration exercise.
And the poor old
DDs actually were
no better off at the
end of ten weeks
of military training then they
were at the start.
So low ace activity made your
muscles more fatigue resistant.
And these were big
findings if you view
the heart as the ultimate
endurance muscle.
It's got to beat maybe
100 times a minute
for lets say
hopefully 105 years.
Not altogether
surprising therefore
that perhaps low ace
activity is beneficial
to heart as an
endurance muscle.
And we began to wonder
whether in fact
if that's what ace
inhibitors were doing.
They were helping this endurance
characteristic of the muscle.
Part of the recruits
training program involves
running 1 1/2 miles
at maximum speed
at the start of the twelve weeks
training and again at the end.
Once again the recruits with
low ace activity developed
greater endurance and
dramatically improved
their run times.
That means the ace
gene is affecting
the entire
metabolic system.
We can now see there
are large advantages
to low levels of ace activity.
The ace gene variation will
partly explain peoples
response to exercise but
it's not "the gene"
for exercise performance.
I think we are a long way off
that sort of genetic selection
of exercise training.
Much better in fact to say that
exercise is good for everybody
and aerobic training is
the best sort of exercise
and that we should
all do it.
So don''t give up the gym
membership just yet.
In the meantime we 'll
keep you updated on further
research developments with
this two faced gene.
Genetics, confusing,
controversial
and always complicated.
But that's life.
I'm Lucky Severson.